# 2018-01-24

## CONFIGURE JNDI IN TOMCAT

Recently I am dauting with some weird problems, it turns out, at least for now, to be related to inaccurate descriptions in the offical documentations and configuration priority.

### A STANDARD CONFIGURATION

It is not hard to configure a jndi for datasource following instructions from [offical documentaion](https://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-7.0-doc/jndi-resources-howto.html#JDBC_Data_Sources).

```xml
<!-- ADD LINES TO WEB.XML -->
<resource-ref>
    <description>My DataSource Reference</description>
    <res-ref-name>jdbc/datasource</res-ref-name>
    <res-type>javax.sql.DataSource</res-type>
    <res-auth>Container</res-auth>
    <res-sharing-scope>Shareable</res-sharing-scope>
</resource-ref>
```

```xml
<!-- CONTEXT.XML -->
<Resource
    name="jdbc/datasource"
    auth="Container"
    type="javax.sql.DataSource"
    driverClassName="com.mysql.jdbc.Driver"
    username="icp"
    password="1qaz2wsx"
    url="jdbc:mysql://[ip]/[database name]?useUnicode=true&amp;characterEncoding=UTF-8"
    maxActive="50"
    maxWait="5000"
    testOnBorrow="true"
    validationQuery="select 1"
    removeAbandoned="true"
    removeAbandonedTimeout="300"
    logAbandoned="true"
    factory="com.alibaba.druid.pool.DruidDataSourceFactory"
    filters="stat"
    connectionProperties="druid.stat.mergeSql=true;druid.stat.slowSqlMillis=10000"
    useGlobalDataSourceStat="true"
/>
```

Ideally, by adding up above configurations, java program could hopeful use those defined datasource by running following code snappet after starting up tomcat.

```java
    // INIT
    Context initContext = new InitialContext();
    // GET PREFIX
    Context envContext = (Context) initContext.lookup("java:comp/env");
    // GET DATASOURCE
    ds = (DataSource) envContext.lookup("jdbc/datasource");
```

These configurations work just fine if application is moved under default workspace for HOST (webapps is the name from a default configuration) to search. Everything works fine, until you would like to change context path for this app. Let's just pust aside the multi-deployment possiblity, in order to have a name other than the war file (or folder) name, one have to configure **Context** in [server.xml](https://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-7.0-doc/config/context.html).

>(path) This attribute must only be used when statically defining a Context in server.xml. In all other circumstances, the path will be inferred from the filenames used for either the .xml context file or the docBase.

But after configuring it in server.xml like below,

```xml
<Context docBase="/path/to/app" path="/path"></Context>
```

Suddenly aforementioned java code does not run at all. This is very odd and after some workaround I believe this is because tomcat stops looking for context configurations once one available is found. In this case, context is clealy defined in server.xml and because this file is of **high priority**, custom definitions in META-INF/context.xml is **ignored** which explains why database connection is never initialized.

To solve this, one can simple put whatever available under custom context.xml file inside corresponding context element in server.xml (this is exactly what **eclipse** tomcat plugin does).

### RESOURCE-REF

Another daunting problem is what *&lt;resource-ref&gt;* is used for. If one reads carefully and follows the steps listed on the official documentation, it looks like this element is a solid part in deployment descriptor (fancy name for web.xml). But actually it is not the case, since you can safely ignore this without affecting anything. Also based on doc,

> &lt;Resource&gt; - Configure the name and data type of a resource made available to the application (equivalent to the inclusion of a &lt;resource-ref&gt; element in the web application deployment descriptor).

It is clealy that *resouce-ref* and *resource* are same thing defined in different locations, but *resource-ref* cannot offer the same implementation detail as *resource* do, thus I suppose it is safe to just ignore *resource-ref* and thus make configuration file more concise.